tonight we're going inside one community
with some of the strictest closures and
curfews in the entire country and here's
why the Navajo Nation has one of the
highest rates of infection in the US and
sadly with few resources and little
infrastructure it's one of the least
equipped to handle a health crisis like
the one we're in right now our Matt
Gutman reports on the unique challenges
the Navajo and many indigenous people
now face
dr. Sri Shama sunder has been practicing
emergency medicine from the back of a
car but there are limits to what this
team can do so EMS has just showed up
because the gentleman is telling the
folks here at copán doctor free that
he's got shortness of breath asthma and
they're trying to decide whether or not
he needs to be hospitalized at this
point everybody here is under
investigation for Colvin and Kovac 19 is
surging through the Navajo community
suffering one of the highest infection
rates per capita in the country the peak
weeks away doctor Shriram is the
co-founder of the heal initiative at the
University of San Francisco I think with
the native population it is similar to
what we've seen
[Music]
next population in bay area they are
more susceptible and New Mexico the
Native Americans of only make up 5%
ovulation that we make up 20% he's
teaming up with locals like the Koch
programs need to Maga Bo champagne
they're doing rounds at this motel in
Gallup New Mexico where the unsheltered
and the sick can go to get off the
street and away from extended families
who's a grandfather
talking with us through that broken mask
like I told you my cult
[Music]
the virus has claimed dozens of Navajo
elders and even some of its young former
Miss Western Navajo Valentine black
horse was a mother of a one-year-old
daughter she died this week after
testing positive for kovat 19 she was 28
years old
Navajo President Jonathan Nez says his
tribe has to rely primarily on itself
it's one reason he's instituted one of
the strictest shelter at home orders in
the country and during the weekend
curfew planned a curb lessen the virus
here and really stopped the virus and
the creative way we're doing this is by
putting a shelter in place order and
we're also putting the curfews Monday
through Friday 8 p.m. to 5 a.m.
weekend's 57 hours historically the US
government hasn't helped much breaking
dozens of promises with Native American
tribes and Congress has approved eight
billion dollars for tribal assistance
but that money has to be split amongst
574 tribes sometimes it goes through the
federal agencies before it gets to the
tribe or it goes through the state
before it gets to the tribe we're using
that same process and we have to wait
and we have to submit for these fundings
but the need is now it's estimated about
30 percent of the people who live on the
Navajo reservation do not have access to
running water which is why they use
pumps like this and that makes the
constant hand-washing necessary during a
cobra outbreak that much more difficult
at that pump we met with Elmer who was
there to get water during the time of
kovat you know everybody's worried you
gotta wash our hands clean all the time
but you don't have running water does it
make it that much harder yes
little children to wash up daily daily
the problem since early March grassroots
groups have worked to provide food and
water the Navajo and Hopi family Cova 19
relief effort raising over a million
dollars
setting up this makeshift hand-washing
station and distributing it around the
reservation it's just one fix to address
the hygiene issue don't wait until
people are sick because the conditions
that are making people more sick and
more at risk are right out on the street
FMO nation is larger than West Virginia
but its population of about 300,000 has
access to only about 20 ICU beds on the
reservation the Indian Health Service
says they've had to build additional
temporary hospital beds to prepare for a
modeling prediction of over 200
additional patients a day over 100 ICU
level patients across the area in the
vastness of the reservation under the
shadow of chimney Butte is where
Michelle Tom grew up also without
running water or power she's now the
only Navajo emergency physician at this
urgent care clinic in Winslow Arizona
you're getting people pulling up to this
parking lot it had to be intubated here
even though this is not technically an
ICU or a hospital it's an urgent care
and then the only way to save their
lives is to get a helicopter here oh yes
and then what we don't know we don't we
don't have access to them anymore and
that's where the disconnect and that's
where the hard part it is for us
especially for me if I know okay
everyone knows early and
I think I hear more so because I have
relatives and we all know he's not doing
so well and as soon as they leave that
chopper don't no longer in our hands
she says the closest to ICU facility or
she can send her patients is at least
one hour away by chopper were up to
three hours in an ambulance said I was
gonna come home after all my medical
training and so forth I am home so this
is you wanted to come back yeah and
Winslow's home and that's why you feel
it's important to be here yes of course
it's no longer a hospital and growing up
tom says she never saw a medical
professional with a face like her own
how does that make people feel that they
don't get medical consultation they
don't see people like them it has their
medical providers well I can only talk
from personal experience right sometimes
there's a disconnect when language and
cultures are not meeting we know that
just by studies and even by experience
you're not going to have the best
healthcare that's not from a lack of
effort I was doing cardiology yesterday
and I would say we had about 15 cars
you know and that's part triage you're
just going to Justice me on my shift in
the car triage and that's not counting
little color medical center blue is an
ER that's not counting ones that bypass
me to go Urgent Care so these are
presumptive cases so and the other issue
is that you know this is a matriarchal
society and people live in a community
and sometimes it's six seven ten people
living in a house or a household and
people are catching it quickly yeah so
that's pretty much along with like the
healthcare access right
you also have the multi-generation we do
and that's part of our origin studies
that's where we are the people that our
community come first
our people comes for these are our
neighbors your relatives as our brothers
and sisters so when we're telling them
to go home an isolate they're isolating
with eight people and that's even for
myself she left her family and moved to
an apartment an hour away to try to
minimize the risk of infecting the group
of people she's trying to save my job is
immensely hard because I have such a
connection
to my people in Thailand our elders are
our teachers or protectors they hold all
of the key elements that we need to have
a strong sense of identity
[Music]
great insight there from that government
thanks for that
hi everyone George Stephanopoulos here
thanks for checking out the ABC News
YouTube channel if you'd like to get
more videos show highlights and watch
live event coverage click on the right
over here to subscribe to our Channel
and don't forget to download the ABC
News app for breaking news alerts thanks
for watching